# BIOMD0000000287: Passos2010_DNAdamage_CellularSenescence

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000287.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000287.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This is the model described in: **Feedback between p21 and reactive oxygen
production is necessary for cell senescence.**  
Passos JF, Nelson G, Wang C, Richter T, Simillion C, Proctor CJ, Miwa S,
Olijslagers S, Hallinan J, Wipat A, Saretzki G, Rudolph KL, Kirkwood TB, von
Zglinicki T. ;_Mol Sys Biol_2010;6:347. Epub 2010 Feb 16.
PMID:[20160708](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20160708)
doi:[10.1038/msb.2010.5](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/msb.2010.5);  
**Abstract:**   
Cellular senescence--the permanent arrest of cycling in normally proliferating
cells such as fibroblasts--contributes both to age-related loss of mammalian
tissue homeostasis and acts as a tumour suppressor mechanism. The pathways
leading to establishment of senescence are proving to be more complex than was
previously envisaged. Combining in-silico interactome analysis and functional
target gene inhibition, stochastic modelling and live cell microscopy, we show
here that there exists a dynamic feedback loop that is triggered by a DNA
damage response (DDR) and, which after a delay of several days, locks the cell
into an actively maintained state of 'deep' cellular senescence. The essential
feature of the loop is that long-term activation of the checkpoint gene CDKN1A
(p21) induces mitochondrial dysfunction and production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) through serial signalling through
GADD45-MAPK14(p38MAPK)-GRB2-TGFBR2-TGFbeta. These ROS in turn replenish short-
lived DNA damage foci and maintain an ongoing DDR. We show that this loop is
both necessary and sufficient for the stability of growth arrest during the
establishment of the senescent phenotype.

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2010 The BioModels.net Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


